The experts look ahead



Cramming more components onto integrated circuits

With unit cost falling as the number of components per circuit rises, by 1975 economics may dictate squeezing as many as 65,000 components on a single silicon chip

By Gordon E. Moore
Director, Research and Development Laboratories, Fairchild Semiconductor division of Fairchild Camera and Instrument Corp.




The future of integrated electronics is the future of electron- ics itself. The advantages of integration will bring about a proliferation of electronics, pushing this science into many new areas.
   Integrated circuits will lead to such wonders as home computers-or at least terminals connected to a central com- puter-automatic controls for automobiles, and personal portable communications equipment. The electronic wrist- watch needs only a display to be feasible today.
    But the biggest potential lies in the production of large systems. In telephone communications, integrated circuits in digital filters will separate channels on multiplex equip- ment. Integrated circuits will also switch telephone circuits and perform data processing.
    Computers will be more powerful, and will be organized in completely different ways. For example, memories built of integrated electronics may be distributed throughout the

The author
Dr. Gordon E. Moore is one of the new breed of electronic engineers, schooled in the physical sciences rather than in electronics. He earned a B.S. degree in chemistry from the University of California and a Ph.D. degree in physical chemistry from the California Institute of Technology. He was one of the founders of Fairchild Semiconductor and has been director of the research and development laboratories since 1959.

machine instead of being concentrated in a central unit. In addition, the improved reliability made possible by integrated circuits will allow the construction of larger processing units. Machines similar to those in existence today will be built at
lower costs and with faster turn-around.
Present and future
    By integrated electronics, I mean all the various tech- nologies which are referred to as microelectronics today as well as any additional ones that result in electronics func- tions supplied to the user as irreducible units. These tech- nologies were first investigated in the late 1950's. The ob- ject was to miniaturize electronics equipment to include in- creasingly complex electronic functions in limited space with minimum weight. Several approaches evolved, including microassembly techniques for individual components, thin- film structures and semiconductor integrated circuits.
    Each approach evolved rapidly and converged so that each borrowed techniques from another. Many researchers believe the way of the future to be a combination of the vari- ous approaches.
    The advocates of semiconductor integrated circuitry are already using the improved characteristics of thin-film resis- tors by applying such films directly to an active semiconduc- tor substrate. Those advocating a technology based upon films are developing sophisticated techniques for the attach- ment of active semiconductor devices to the passive film ar- rays.
    Both approaches have worked well and are being used in equipment today.

The establishment
    Integrated electronics is established today. Its techniques are almost mandatory for new military systems, since the re- liability, size and weight required by some of them is achiev- able only with integration. Such programs as Apollo, for manned moon flight, have demonstrated the reliability of in- tegrated electronics by showing that complete circuit func- tions are as free from failure as the best individual transis- tors.
    Most companies in the commercial computer field have machines in design or in early production employing inte- grated electronics. These machines cost less and perform better than those which use "conventional" electronics.
    Instruments of various sorts, especially the rapidly in- creasing numbers employing digital techniques, are starting to use integration because it cuts costs of both manufacture and design.
    The use of linear integrated circuitry is still restricted primarily to the military. Such integrated functions are ex- pensive and not available in the variety required to satisfy a major fraction of linear electronics. But the first applica- tions are beginning to appear in commercial electronics, par- ticularly in equipment which needs low-frequency amplifi-
ers of small size.
Reliability counts
    In almost every case, integrated electronics has demon- strated high reliability. Even at the present level of produc- tion-low compared to that of discrete components-it of- fers reduced systems cost, and in many systems improved performance has been realized.
    Integrated electronics will make electronic techniques more generally available throughout all of society, perform- ing many functions that presently are done inadequately by other techniques or not done at all. The principal advantages will be lower costs and greatly simplified design-payoffs from a ready supply of low-cost functional packages.
    For most applications, semiconductor integrated circuits will predominate. Semiconductor devices are the only rea- sonable candidates presently in existence for the active ele- ments of integrated circuits. Passive semiconductor elements look attractive too, because of their potential for low cost and high reliability, but they can be used only if precision is not a prime requisite.
    Silicon is likely to remain the basic material, although others will be of use in specific applications. For example, gallium arsenide will be important in integrated microwave functions. But silicon will predominate at lower frequencies because of the technology which has already evolved around it and its oxide, and because it is an abundant and relatively
inexpensive starting material.
Costs and curves
    Reduced cost is one of the big attractions of integrated electronics, and the cost advantage continues to increase as the technology evolves toward the production of larger and larger circuit functions on a single semiconductor substrate. For simple circuits, the cost per component is nearly inversely proportional to the number of components, the result of the


equivalent piece of semiconductor in the equivalent package containing more components. But as components are added, decreased yields more than compensate for the increased complexity, tending to raise the cost per component. Thus there is a minimum cost at any given time in the evolution of the technology. At present, it is reached when 50 compo- nents are used per circuit. But the minimum is rising rapidly while the entire cost curve is falling (see graph below). If we look ahead five years, a plot of costs suggests that the mini- mum cost per component might be expected in circuits with about 1,000 components per circuit (providing such circuit functions can be produced in moderate quantities.) In 1970, the manufacturing cost per component can be expected to be only a tenth of the present cost.
    The complexity for minimum component costs has in- creased at a rate of roughly a factor of two per year (see graph on next page). Certainly over the short term this rate can be expected to continue, if not to increase. Over the longer term, the rate of increase is a bit more uncertain, al- though there is no reason to believe it will not remain nearly constant for at least 10 years. That means by 1975, the num- ber of components per integrated circuit for minimum cost will be 65,000.
    I believe that such a large circuit can be built on a single wafer.
Two-mil squares
    With the dimensional tolerances already being employed in integrated circuits, isolated high-performance transistors can be built on centers two thousandths of an inch apart. Such














a two-mil square can also contain several kilohms of resis- tance or a few diodes. This allows at least 500 components per linear inch or a quarter million per square inch. Thus, 65,000 components need occupy only about one-fourth a square inch.
    On the silicon wafer currently used, usually an inch or more in diameter, there is ample room for such a structure if the components can be closely packed with no space wasted for interconnection patterns. This is realistic, since efforts to achieve a level of complexity above the presently available integrated circuits are already underway using multilayer metalization patterns separated by dielectric films. Such a density of components can be achieved by present optical techniques and does not require the more exotic techniques, such as electron beam operations, which are being studied to
make even smaller structures.
 ncreasing the yield
    There is no fundamental obstacle to achieving device yields of 100%. At present, packaging costs so far exceed the cost of the semiconductor structure itself that there is no incentive to improve yields, but they can be raised as high as

is economically justified. No barrier exists comparable to the thermodynamic equilibrium considerations that often limit yields in chemical reactions; it is not even necessary to do any fundamental research or to replace present processes. Only the engineering effort is needed.
    In the early days of integrated circuitry, when yields were extremely low, there was such incentive. Today ordinary in- tegrated circuits are made with yields comparable with those obtained for individual semiconductor devices. The same pattern will make larger arrays economical, if other consid-
erations make such arrays desirable.
Heat problem
    Will it be possible to remove the heat generated by tens of thousands of components in a single silicon chip?
    If we could shrink the volume of a standard high-speed digital computer to that required for the components them- selves, we would expect it to glow brightly with present power dissipation. But it won't happen with integrated circuits. Since integrated electronic structures are two-dimensional, they have a surface available for cooling close to each center of heat generation. In addition, power is needed primarily to drive the various lines and capacitances associated with the system. As long as a function is confined to a small area on a wafer, the amount of capacitance which must be driven is distinctly limited. In fact, shrinking dimensions on an inte- grated structure makes it possible to operate the structure at
higher speed for the same power per unit area.
Day of reckoning
    Clearly, we will be able to build such component- crammed equipment. Next, we ask under what circumstances we should do it. The total cost of making a particular system function must be minimized. To do so, we could amortize the engineering over several identical items, or evolve flex- ible techniques for the engineering of large functions so that no disproportionate expense need be borne by a particular array. Perhaps newly devised design automation procedures could translate from logic diagram to technological realiza- tion without any special engineering.
It may prove to be more economical to build large

systems out of smaller functions, which are separately pack- aged and interconnected. The availability of large functions, combined with functional design and construction, should allow the manufacturer of large systems to design and con- struct a considerable variety of equipment both rapidly and
economically.
Linear circuitry
    Integration will not change linear systems as radically as digital systems. Still, a considerable degree of integration will be achieved with linear circuits. The lack of large-value capacitors and inductors is the greatest fundamental limita- tions to integrated electronics in the linear area.
    By their very nature, such elements require the storage of energy in a volume. For high Q it is necessary that the volume be large. The incompatibility of large volume and integrated electronics is obvious from the terms themselves. Certain resonance phenomena, such as those in piezoelectric crystals, can be expected to have some applications for tun- ing functions, but inductors and capacitors will be with us for some time.
The integrated r-f amplifier of the future might well con-

sist of integrated stages of gain, giving high performance at minimum cost, interspersed with relatively large tuning ele- ments.
    Other linear functions will be changed considerably. The matching and tracking of similar components in integrated structures will allow the design of differential amplifiers of greatly improved performance. The use of thermal feedback effects to stabilize integrated structures to a small fraction of a degree will allow the construction of oscillators with crys- tal stability.
    Even in the microwave area, structures included in the definition of integrated electronics will become increasingly important. The ability to make and assemble components small compared with the wavelengths involved will allow the use of lumped parameter design, at least at the lower fre- quencies. It is difficult to predict at the present time just how extensive the invasion of the microwave area by integrated electronics will be. The successful realization of such items as phased-array antennas, for example, using a multiplicity of integrated microwave power sources, could completely revolutionize radar.




